# Glibc mallopt

- Sometimes useful to programmers, glibc provides a means to change the malloc engine's defaults thanks to its ability pass some specific parameters.

- The API is `mallopt(3)`:

  ```c
  #include <malloc.h>
  int mallopt(int param, int value);
  ```

- One of the parameters that can be tweaked is `M_MAP_THRESHOLD`.

  - `malloc` does not always get memory blocks from the heap segment.
  - If the size of the allocation request is above or equal to `MMAP_THRESHOLD`, the request is serviced under the hood via the powerful `mmap(2)` system call (which sets up an arbitrary region of virtual address space of the size requested).
  - The default value  of  `MMAP_THRESHOLD` is 128 KB. This can be changed via the `M_MAP_THRESHOLD` parameter using `mallopt(3)`!
  - But we should not change it, only that we could.
  - The default value is carefully arrived at and probably best suited to most application workloads.

- Another useful parameter is `M_CHECK_ACTION`. This parameter determines how glibc reacts when memory errors are detected. (a write overflow or a double free).

- However, the implementation does not detect all types of memory errors (leakage goes unnoticed).

- At runtime, glibc interprets these three **least significant bits (LSB)** of the parameter's value to determine how to react:

  - **Bit 0**: If set, print one-line error message to `stder` providing detailed information regarding the cause.
  - **Bit 1**: If set, after printing the error message, `abort(3)` is invoked causing the process to terminate. 
  - **Bit 2**: If set, and if bit 0 set, simplify the error message format.

- The `M_CHECK_ACTION` default value is 3.

  - Setting `M_CHECK_ACTION` to a nonzero value can be very useful as it will cause a buggy process to crash at the point the bug is hit, and display useful diagnostics.
  - It it were zero, the process would probably enter an undefined state (UB) and crash at some arbitrary point in the future, making debugging a lot harder.
  - `1 (001b)` : Print a detailed error message but continue execution (process is now in UB!)
  - `3 (011b)`: Print a detailed error message, call stack, memory mappings, and abort execution [default].
  - `5 (101b)`: Print a simple error message and continue execution (process is now in UB!)
  - `7 (111b)`: Print a simple error message, call stack, memory mappings, and abort execution.