# What is a Transaction?

- A device for grouping together multiple SQL statements such that either all or none of the statements succeed (a property known as atomicity).
- Example:
  - If we attempt to transfer $500 from our savings account to our checking account, we would be upset if the money was deducted from the saving accounts but never made it to our checking account.
  - Possible reasons might be server was shutdown for maintenance or the request for a page lock on the account table timed out.
  - To protect this kind of error, 
    1. The program that handles the transfer request would first begin a transaction.
    2. Then, issue the SQL statements needed to move the money from the savings to checking account,
    3. If everything succeeds, end the transaction by issuing the `commit` command.
    4. If something unexpected happens, the program would issue a `rollback` command, which instructs the server to undo all changes made since the transaction began.
  - Additionally, if our program finishes a transaction and issues a `commit` but the server shuts down before the changes have been applied to permanent storage (i.e., the modified data is sitting in memory but has not been flushed to disk),  then the database server must reapply the changes from our transaction when the server is restarted (a property known as durability).

**The entire process**

```css
START TRANSACTION;

 /* withdraw money from first account, making sure balance is sufficient */
UPDATE account SET avail_balance = avail_balance - 500
WHERE account_id = 9988
  AND avail_balance > 500;

IF <exactly one row was updated by the previous statement> THEN
  /* deposit money into second account */
  UPDATE account SET avail_balance = avail_balance + 500
    WHERE account_id = 9989;

  IF <exactly one row was updated by the previous statement> THEN
    /* everything worked, make the changes permanent */
    COMMIT;
  ELSE
    /* something went wrong, undo all changes in this transaction */
    ROLLBACK;
  END IF;
ELSE
  /* insufficient funds, or error encountered during update */
  ROLLBACK;
END IF;
```

