# Process Credentials

- Linux process credentials are the set of identifiers and associated permission sets that determine what operations a process is allowed to perform. 
- These credentials are stored in the process's task structure (commonly in the kernel’s task_struct) and play a crucial role in access control and security enforcement. 
- The point is this: if the data is in kernel address space, the only way to get at it (query or set) is via system calls.

## Key Components of Process Credentials

1. **User IDs:**
   - **Real User ID (UID):**
     - This is the actual user who started the process.
     -  It’s used for accounting and some security checks.
   - **Effective User ID (EUID):**
     - This ID determines the privileges the process has while running. 
     - It is often the same as the real UID, but can change when setuid programs are executed.
   - **Saved Set-User ID:**
     - When a process with setuid privileges executes a new program, its effective UID may change; the saved set-user ID allows it to regain its elevated privileges if needed.
     
     ```c
     #include <unistd.h>
     #include <sys/types.h>
     
     uid_t getuid(void);
     uid_t geteuid(void);
     ```
     
     - `getuid()` returns the real UID. `geteuid()` returns the effective UID.
   
2. **Group IDs:**
   - **Real Group ID (GID):**
     - This is the primary group of the user that started the process.
   - **Effective Group ID (EGID):**
     - Similar to the EUID, this determines the group-based privileges for the process.
     
     ```c
     #include <unistd.h>
     #include <sys/types.h>
     
     gid_t getgid(void);
     gid_t getegid(void);
     ```
     
     - `getgid()` returns the real GID. `getegid()` returns the effective GID.
     - The four system calls do not take any parameters, they return the real of effective [U | G] IDs, for the calling process, the process that issues the system calls.
   
   
   
   ```c
   #define _GNU_SOURCE
   #include <stdlib.h>
   #include <stdio.h>
   #include <assert.h>
   #include <string.h>
   #include <strings.h>
   #include <sys/types.h>
   #include <sys/time.h>
   #include <unistd.h>
   #include <sys/resource.h>
   #include <sys/mman.h>
   #include <alloca.h>
   #include <malloc.h>
   #include "hello.h"
   
   #define SHOW_CREDS()                                      \
       do                                                    \
       {                                                     \
           printf("RUID=%d\n"                                \
                  "EUID=%d\n"                                \
                  "RGID=%d\n"                                \
                  "EGID=%d\n",                               \
                  getuid(), geteuid(), getgid(), getegid()); \
       } while (0)
   
   int main(int argc, char *argv[])
   {
       SHOW_CREDS();
       if (getuid() == 0)
       {
           printf("%s now effectively running as root! ...\n", argv[0]);
           sleep(1);
       }
   
       return 0;
   }
   ```
   
   ```sh
   chan@CMA:~/C_Programming/test$ ./final
   RUID=1000
   EUID=1000
   RGID=1000
   EGID=1000
   chan@CMA:~/C_Programming/test$ sudo ./final
   [sudo] password for chan: 
   RUID=0
   EUID=0
   RGID=0
   EGID=0
   ./final now effectively running as root! ...
   ```
   
   - ON the first run, the four process credential values are the usual ones (1000, in our example). Also note how by default the EUID = RUID and the EGID = RGID.
   - But on the second run we `sudo` it: once we get the password right, the process runs as root, which of course can be literally seen here: the four process credential values are now all zeros reflecting root authority.
   
   
   
   - **Supplementary Groups:**
     - Processes can belong to additional groups that grant them extra permissions. 
     - This list is used to check group-based file permissions and resource access.
   
   ```sh
   chan@CMA:~$ id
   uid=1000(chan) gid=1000(chan) groups=1000(chan),4(adm),24(cdrom),27(sudo),30(dip),46(plugdev),122(lpadmin),135(lxd),136(sambashare)
   chan@CMA:~$ ps
       PID TTY          TIME CMD
      4171 pts/0    00:00:00 bash
     21157 pts/0    00:00:00 ps
   
   ```
   
   - The `id` command shows us that the process UID is 1000 and the process GID also happens to be 1000. (The user belongs to several groups).
   
   - Every process we now run from this shell will inherit the privileges of this user account, that is, it will run with the same UID and GID as the login shell.
   
   - But where does the process get its UID and GID values from?
   
     - We logged in as the user `chan`, and this account's `/etc/passwd` entry's third and fourth fields are where the process UID and GID come from.
     - So, every time we run a process from this shell, that process will run with UID 1000 and GID 1000.
   
   - We want to understand how exactly the OS checks whether we can perform an operation such as the following:
   
     ```sh
     echo "I can append this string" >> myfile
     ```
   
     - The key question here is: how exactly, at runtime, when the preceding echo process is attempting to write to the `myfile` file, does the kernel determine whether the write access is allowed.
   
     - To do this, the OS must determine the following:
   
       - **What is the ownership and group membership of the file in question?**
   
         - The file's ownership and group membership information (and a lot more regarding the file) is carried as attributes of the key data structure of the filesystem - the **information node (inode)**.
         - The inode data structure is a per-file structure and lives within the kernel (filesystem; it's read into memory when the file is first accessed).
         - User space can of course access this information via system calls.
         - So, the file owner ID is stored in the inode - let's just call it `file_UID`.
   
       - **In what access category is the process attempting the access running under (for example, is it U | G | O)?**
   
         - The access category will either be **Owner (U)**, **Group (G)**, or **Other (O)**. They are mutually exclusive.
         - The algorithm used by the OS to determine the access category is something like this:
   
         ```css
         if process_UID == file_UID
         then
         	access_category = U
         else if process_GID = file_GID
         then
         	access_category = G
         else
         	access_category = O
         ```
   
         - A process can belong to several groups simultaneously.
         -  So, at permission checking time, the kernel checks all groups; if the process belongs to any one of them, the access category is set to G.
   
       - **For that access category, does the permission bitwask allow access?**
   
         - Check the permission bitmask (rwx), if the relevant bit is set, the process will be allowed the operation; if not, it won't be.
   
         ```sh
         chan@CMA:~$ ls -l ls.txt
         -rw-rw-r-- 1 chan chan 14354 Mar 25  2024 ls.txt
         chan@CMA:~$ stat ls.txt
           File: ls.txt
           Size: 14354     	Blocks: 32         IO Block: 4096   regular file
         Device: 8,4	Inode: 1336906     Links: 1
         Access: (0664/-rw-rw-r--)  Uid: ( 1000/    chan)   Gid: ( 1000/    chan)
         Access: 2024-03-26 15:12:20.238019613 +0700
         Modify: 2024-03-25 12:20:41.776067162 +0700
         Change: 2024-03-25 12:20:41.776067162 +0700
          Birth: 2024-03-16 15:51:30.240998583 +0700
         ```
   
         - The `stat` command show us the inode content of the file `myfile`.
   
3. **Capabilities:**
   
   - **Linux Capabilities:**
     - Beyond traditional UID/GID checks, Linux divides the all-powerful root privileges into smaller, distinct units called capabilities. 
     - These include permissions like binding to low-numbered ports, overriding file permissions, and more. 
     - A process’s capability sets (such as the permitted, effective, inheritable, bounding, and ambient sets) determine its fine-grained access rights.

### How Credentials Are Managed

- **Inheritance on Process Creation:**
  - When a new process is created via a fork, it inherits the credentials of its parent. 
  - During an `execve` system call, however, these credentials can be modified—especially if the executable file has setuid or setgid bits set.
- **System Calls and API:**
  - Linux provides various system calls (like `getuid()`, `geteuid()`, `setuid()`, and their group counterparts) that allow processes to query and modify their credentials within permitted boundaries.
- **Security Enforcement:**
  - The kernel uses process credentials during permission checks (e.g., when accessing files, using system resources, or making system calls) to ensure that processes do not exceed their allowed privileges.

## Summary

- Process credentials in Linux encapsulate both user and group IDs along with advanced capability sets. 
- These credentials, maintained in the kernel’s process descriptor, are fundamental to the system’s security model—they determine which files a process can access, what system calls it can execute, and how it interacts with other processes. 
- This robust model of credentials ensures that even processes that require elevated privileges (via mechanisms like setuid) can do so in a controlled and auditable manner.