# How can a regular user change their password?

- The password is stored is stored in the `/etc/passwd` file.
- On modern Unixes (including Linux of course), for better security it's **shadowed**: it's actually stored in a file called `/etc/shadow`.

```sh
chan@CMA:~$ ls -l /etc/shadow
-rw-r----- 1 root shadow 1636 Oct 22 16:14 /etc/shadow

```

- As highlighted, you can see that the file owner is root, the group membership is shadow, and the permission bitmask for UGO is `-rw-r-----`. This means the following:
  - The owner (root) can perform read/write operations
  - The group (shadow) can perform read-only operations
  - The others cannot do anything to the file
- To change the password, we need write access to `/etc/shadow`, but clearly only root has write access to `/etc/shadow`.
- We logged in as a regular user, not root. We can change our password using the `passwd(1)` utility.

```sh
chan@CMA:~$ which passwd
/usr/bin/passwd
chan@CMA:~$ ls -l $(which passwd)
-rwsr-xr-x 1 root root 64152 May 30  2024 /usr/bin/passwd
```

- It's the owner execute bit: it's not an `x` as we might expect, but an `s` ! (Really, this is the reason behind the pretty red coloring of the executable name in preceding the long listing).
- It's a special permission bit: for a binary executable file, when there's an `s` in the owner's execute bit, it is referred to as a setuid binary.
- This means whenever a setuid program is executed, the result process's **Effective Userid (EUID)** changes (from the default: the original Real User ID (RUID) value) to become equal to the owner of the binary executable file. The EUID will become root (as the `/usr/bin/passwd` file is owned by root).

| Process credentials / process | RUID | EUID | RGID | EGID |
| ----------------------------- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- |
| bash                          | 1000 | 1000 | 2000 | 2000 |
| vi                            | 1000 | 1000 | 2000 | 2000 |
| /usr/bin/passwd               | 1000 | 0    | 2000 | 2000 |



- This answers how it works: the EUID being the speical value 0 (root), the OS now sees the process as being a root process and allows it to write into the `/etc/shadow` database.
- A program such as `/usr/bin/passwd`, inherits root access by virtue of the setuid bit and the fact that the file owner is root: these kinds of programs are called setuid root binaries (set-user-ID-root programs).