# Managing the Cluster

- A PostgreSQL cluster is a collection of several databases that all run under the very same PostgreSQL service or instance.
- Managing a cluster means being able to start, stop, take control, and get information about the status of a PostgreSQL instance.
- PostgreSQL ships with a specific tool called `pg_ctl`, which helps in managing the cluster and the related running processes.

## `pg_ctl`

- Allows us to perform different actions on a cluster, mainly initialize, start, restart, stop and so on.
- Accepts the command to execute the first argument, followed by other specific arguments.
  - The main commands:
    - `start`, `stop`, and `restart` execute the corresponding actions on the cluster.
    - `status` reports the current status (running or not) of the cluster.
    - `initdb` (or `init` for short) executes the initialization of the cluster, possibly removing any previously existing data.
    - `reload` causes the PostgreSQL server to reload the configuration, which is useful when we want to apply configuration changes.
    - `promote` is used when the cluster is running as a replica server (namely a `standby` node) and, from now on, must be detached from the original primary becoming independent.
- `pg_ctl` interacts mainly with the postmaster (the first process launched within a cluster), which in turn “redirects” commands to other existing processes.
- For instance, when `pg_ctl` starts a server instance, it makes the postmaster process run, which in turn completes all the startup activities, including launching other utility processes (as briefly explained in the previous chapter). 
- On the other hand, when `pg_ctl` stops a cluster, it issues a halt command to the postmaster, which in turn requires other active processes to exit, waiting for them to finish.
- `pg_ctl` needs to know where the `PGDATA` is located.
  - This can be specified by either setting an environment variable named `PGDATA` or by specifying it on the command line by means of the `–D` flag.