# The template databases

- The `template1` database is the first database created when the system is initialized, and then it is cloned into `template0`.
  - This means that the two databases are, at least initially, identical, and the aim of `template0` is to act as a safe copy for rebuilding in case it is accidentally damaged or removed.
  - Whatever object we put into `template1`, we will find the very same object in freshly created databases.
  - We cannot connect to `template0`, since this is to prevent accidental damage to `template0` (the safety copy).
  - The cluster and all user-defined databases can work even without the template databases, meaning the `template1` and `template0` databases are not fundamental for the other databases to run.
  - But if we lose the templates, we will be required to use another database as a template every time we perform an action that requires it, such as creating a new database.
- We can inspect available databses using the `psql -l` command.
- On a freshly installed installation, we will get the following 3 databases (`postgres`, `template0`, & `template1`).
- In the Docker image, we will also see the `forumdb` database, which has been automatically created for us to let us interact with other examples.
- `postgres` database belongs to the `postgres` user, by default the only database administrator created during the initialization process.
  - Common space to be used for connections instead of the template databases.

```bash
~ ➤ psql -l
Name    |  Owner   | Encoding | Locale Provider |   Collate   |    Ctype    | ICU Locale | ICU Rules |   Access privileges
------------+----------+----------+-----------------+-------------+-------------+------------+-----------+-----------------------
 helloworld | postgres | UTF8     | libc            | en_SG.UTF-8 | en_SG.UTF-8 |            |           |
 mytestdb   | postgres | UTF8     | libc            | en_SG.UTF-8 | en_SG.UTF-8 |            |           |
 postgres   | postgres | UTF8     | libc            | en_SG.UTF-8 | en_SG.UTF-8 |            |           |
 template0  | postgres | UTF8     | libc            | en_SG.UTF-8 | en_SG.UTF-8 |            |           | =c/postgres          +
            |          |          |                 |             |             |            |           | postgres=CTc/postgres
 template1  | postgres | UTF8     | libc            | en_SG.UTF-8 | en_SG.UTF-8 |            |           | =c/postgres          +
:
```

