# Solving common connection problems

## Database "foo" does not exist

- Either we misspelled the name of the database or we are trying to connect without specifying the database name.
- The following connection fails because by default, it is assuming that the user chan is trying to connect to a database with the same name (`chan`) since none has been explicitly set.
  - `-d` option to solve the issue by specifying the name.

```bash
~ ➤ psql
psql: error: connection to server on socket "/var/run/postgresql/.s.PGSQL.5432" failed: FATAL:  database "chan" does not exist
```

---

## Connection refused

- Usually means network connection problems.
  - Either the host we are trying to connect is not reachable 
  - or the cluster is not listening on the network.
- Usually, we have to fix the server configuration or connect to the remote machine (via SSH, for instance) and open a local connection from there.
- In order to quickly solve the problem, we have to edit the `postgresql.conf` file (usually located under the `PGDATA` directory) and ensure the `listen_address` option has an asterisk (or the name of our external network card) so that the server will listen on any available network address:

```css
listen_addresses = "*"
```

- After a restart of the service, by means of the `restart` command issued to `pg_ctl`, the client will be able to connect.
- **Security Note:** Enabling the server to listen on any available network address might not be the optimal solution and can expose the server to risks in a production environment.

---

## No `pg_hba.conf` entry

- Means the server is up and running and able to accept our request, but PostgreSQL built-in **Host-Based Access (HBA)** control does not permit us to enter.
- Adding a single line such as the following to the `pg_hba.conf` file can fix the problem.

```css
host all chan 127.0.0.1/32 trust
```

- We need to reload the configuration in order to apply changes.

---

