# Concurrency Introduction 

- Concurrency is the computer science term for breaking up a single process into independent components and specifying how these components safely share data.
- Concurrency allows our program to **do many things at once**, making it more efficient, especially for I/O-bound or high-latency tasks.
- **Concurrency** means structuring a program so multiple tasks can run **independently and potentially simultaneously**, **but not necessarily in parallel**. 
  - **Parallelism**: Actually running multiple tasks **simultaneously**, usually on multiple CPU cores.
  - Go handles concurrency; if enough cores are available, it can achieve parallelism too.
- Its concurrency model is based on **Communicating Sequential Processes (CSP)**, 
  - a paradigm where concurrent computations communicate through channels rather than by sharing memory (though shared memory with synchronization is also possible).
- In Go, this is enabled by:
  - **Goroutines** – Lightweight, managed threads of execution.
  - **Channels** – Typed conduits for communication between goroutines.
  - **`select` statement** – Allows a goroutine to wait on multiple communication operations.
- More concurrency doesn't automatically make things faster. It's a tool to better structure the problem we are trying to solve.
- Whether concurrent code runs in parallel (at the same time) depends on the hardware and whether the algorithm allows it.

---

### When to Use Concurrency

- Depends on how data flows through the steps in our program.
- Sometimes two steps can be concurrent because the data from one is not required for the other to proceed, and
  - at other times two steps must happen in series because one depends on the other's output.
- We should use concurrency when we want to combine data from multiple operations that can operate independently.
- Concurrency isn't worth using if the process that's running concurrently doesn't take a lot of time 
  - as many common in-memory algorithms are so fast than the overhead of passing values via concurrency.
- Concurrent operations are often used for I/O; reading or writing to a disk or network is thousands of times slower than all but the most complicated in-memory processes.



---

### Common Pitfalls

- **Data races**: Two goroutines accessing the same variable without synchronization.
- **Deadlocks**: Waiting forever on channel ops that never complete.
- **Blocking**: A goroutine waiting for something that may never arrive.

We can use the `-race` flag to detect race conditions:

```bash
go run -race main.go
```

