# Interval timers

- Allows a process to setup and query a timer that can be programmed to auto-recur at a fixed time interval.

```c
#include <sys/time.h>
int getitimer(int which, struct itimerval *curr_value);
int setitimer(int which, const struct itimerval *new_value, struct itimerval *old_value);
```

- The `setitimer(2)` is used to setup a new timer, the `getitimer(2)` can be used to query it, and returns the time remaining.

- 1st param (`which`): specifies the type of timer to use.

  - `ITIMER_REAL`: To count down in real-time, which is also called **wall clock time**. 
  - `ITIMER_VIRTUAL`: to count down in virtual time. The timer only counts down when the calling process (all threads) is running in user space on the CPU.
  - `ITIMER_PROF`: to count down in virtual time too. The timer counts down when the calling process (all threads) is running in both user-space and/or kernel space on the CPU.
  - Upon all those types timer expiry, the kernel sends `SIGALRM` to the calling process.

- 2nd param (`itimerval`) of `getitimer()`: 

  - ```c
    struct itimerval{
        struct timeval it_interval; // interval for periodic timer
        struct timeval it_value; // time until next expiration
    }
    
    struct timeval{
        time_t tv_sec; // seconds
        suseconds_t tv_usec; // microseconds
    }
    ```

  - Both the internal `time_t` and the `suseconds_t` typedefs translate to a long (integer) value.

- 2nd param of `setitimer(2)`: a pointer to struct `itimerval` called `new_value`.

  - It is where we specify the new timer's expiration times.



If we wanted a repeating (interval) timeout every second, we need to initialize the structures as follows:

```c
struct itimerval mytimer;
memset(&mytimer, 0, sizeof(struct itimerval));
mytimer.it_value.tv_sec = 1;
mytimer.it_interval.tv_sec = 1;
setitimer(ITIMER_REAL, &mytimer, 0);
```

A few special cases exist:

- To cancel (or disarm) a timer, set both fields of the `it_timer` structure to zero and invoke `setitimer(2)` API.
- To create a single-shot timer (one that expires exactly once), initialize both fields of the `it_interval` struct to zero, and then invoke the `setitimer()` API.
- If the 3rd param to `setitimer()` is non-NULL, the previous timer value is returned here (as if the `getitimer()` were invoked).

---