## The Unix fork-exec semantic

- It combines what several other OSes call a spawn into two discrete operations: a process creation (fork) and a process execution (exec).

---

## Value-result or in-out parameter

- The parameter to `wait()` API is a pointer to an integer `wstatus`. 
- In reality, it is treated as more of a return rather than a parameter to pass along. This is a pretty common C programming technique, *treat a parameter as a return value*.
- System calls on Linux often use it. This technique is often referred to as **a value-result or in-out parameter**.

---

## Fork bombs and creating more than one child

```c
int main(){
    [...]
    fork();
    fork();
    fork();
    [...]
}
```

- Recall Fork rule #1: Execution in both the parent and child process continues at the instruction following the fork.
- Thus, after the first fork, both the parent and child run the second fork. So we now have a total of four processes.
- All those 4 processes will run the third fork. Giving us a total of eight processes.



Imagine what damage can be done with this code:

```c
int main(void){
    while(1){
        fork();
    }
}
```

- It's quite rightly called a fork bomb: a type of **denial-of-service (DoS)** attack.
- Because of modern Unixes having COW-based copying semantics, the memory overhead incurred may not be that large, but still consumes huge amounts of CPU.

---

## Wait scenario 

- What if a process has no children and it issues the `wait(2)` API?
  - The kernel code of `wait` checks, and upon finding that the calling process has no children, it simply fails the `wait`.

---