# Structs

- Maps don't define an API since there's no way to constrain a map to allow only certain keys.
  - All values in a map must be of the same type.
- Thus, maps are not an ideal way to pass data from function to function.
- At its core, a **struct** is a **composite data type** that lets us group together
  - zero or more variables (called **fields** or **members**) of different data types under a single name.
- Structs in Go are **value types**. This means:
  - When we assign a struct variable to another, a complete *copy* of the struct (including all its fields) is made.
  - When we pass a struct to a function, a *copy* is passed by default. 
    - Changes made to the copy inside the function do not affect the original struct unless pointers are used.
- Instead of passing around many separate variables (e.g., `firstName`, `lastName`, `age`), we pass around a single `Person` struct.

```go
type Person struct{
    FirstName string
    LastName string
    age int
    isActive bool
}
```

- Fields starting with an **uppercase** letter (like `FirstName`, `LastName`) are **exported**. 
  - They can be accessed from other packages that import the package where the struct is defined.
- Fields starting with a **lowercase** letter (like `age`) are **unexported**. 
  - They can only be accessed from within the *same* package where the struct is defined.
- A struct literal can be assigned to a variable as well:

```go
bob := person{}
```

- Unlike maps, there's no difference between assigning an empty struct literal and not assigning a value at all.
  - Both initialize all fields in the struct to their zero values.

---

## Accessing Fields

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
)

type Person struct {
	FirstName string
	LastName  string
	Age       int
}

func main() {
	p1 := Person{FirstName: "Bob", LastName: "Jones", Age: 42}
	fmt.Println("First Name: ", p1.FirstName)
	fmt.Println("Age: ", p1.Age)

	// pointer to instance
	pPtr := &p1
	fmt.Println("Last Name (via ptr): ", pPtr.LastName)
	fmt.Println("Age (via ptr): ", pPtr.Age)

	// modifying via pointer affects the original
	pPtr.Age = 45
	fmt.Println("Original Age (after ptr mod): ", p1.Age)
}
```

```sh
chan@CMA:~/Go_Programming/ch1$ make
go fmt ./...
hello.go
go vet ./...
go build 
chan@CMA:~/Go_Programming/ch1$ ./hello_world
First Name:  Bob
Age:  42
Last Name (via ptr):  Jones
Age (via ptr):  42
Original Age (after ptr mod):  45
```

---

