# Partitioning Concepts

- When a table is partitioned, two or more table partitions are created, each having the exact same definition but with nonoverlapping subsets of data.
- Each partition can be treated independently for operations, but from an application's perspective, the table appears as a single entity.
- Once a table has been partitioned, the table itself becomes a virtual concept; the partitions hold the data, and any indexes are built on the data in the partitions.
- Particularly useful for handling high volumes of data in distributed systems.

## Table Partitioning

- The partitioning scheme available in most relational databases is *horizontal partitioning*, which assigns entire rows to exactly one partition.
- When partitioning a table horizontally, we must choose a *partition key*, which is the column whose values are used to assign a row to a particular partition.
- In most cases, a table’s partition key consists of a single column, and a *partitioning function* is applied to this column to determine in which partition each row should reside.

## Index Partitioning

- **Global Index**:  If our partitioned table has indexes, we will get to choose whether a particular index should stay intact.

- **Local Index**: or be broken into pieces such that each partition has its own index.

- Global indexes span all partitions of the table and are useful for queries that do not specify a value for the partition key.

  - E.g, let’s say our table is partitioned on the `sale_date` column, and a user executes the following query:

  - ```mysql
    SELECT sum(amount) FROM sales WHERE geo_region_cd = 'US'
    ```

  - Since this query does not include a filter condition on the `sale_date` column, the server will need to search every partition in order to find the total US sales. 

  - If a global index is built on the `geo_region_cd` column, however, then the server could use this index to quickly find all of the rows containing US sales.
