# Querying and changing resource limit values

- The kernel has certain preset rules regarding the changing of a resource limit.
- Querying or setting a process's resource limits can only be done by the calling process upon itself or upon a process that it owns; more correctly, for any other process besides itself, the process must have the `CAP_SYS_RESOURCE` capability bit set.
- **Querying**: Anyone can query the resource limits hard and soft values of the processes they own.
- **Setting**: 
  - A hard limit, once set, cannot be further increased (for that session).
  - A soft limit can be increased up to the hard limit value only, that is, soft limit range = [0, hard-limit].
  - When one sets the resource limit using `ulimit`, the system internally sets **both the hard and soft limits**. This has important consequences.

- A privileged process (such as `/superuser/root/sysadmin`, or one with the aforementioned `CAP_SYS_RESOURCE` capability) can increase or decrease both hard and soft limits.
- A non-privileged process (non-root):
  - Can set the soft limit of a resource in the range [0, hard-limit] for that resource.
  - Can irreversibly decrease a resource's hard limit (once reduced, it cannot ever increase it, but can only continue to decrease it). The hard limit can be decreased to a value greater than or equal to the current soft limit.

```shell
chan@CMA:~$ ulimit -n
1024
chan@CMA:~$ ulimit -aS | grep "open files"
open files                          (-n) 1024
chan@CMA:~$ ulimit -aH | grep "open files"
open files                          (-n) 1048576
chan@CMA:~$ ulimit -n 3000
chan@CMA:~$ ulimit -aS | grep "open files"
open files                          (-n) 3000
chan@CMA:~$ ulimit -aH | grep "open files"
open files                          (-n) 3000
chan@CMA:~$ ulimit -n 3001
bash: ulimit: open files: cannot modify limit: Operation not permitted
chan@CMA:~$ ulimit -n 2000
chan@CMA:~$ ulimit -n
2000
chan@CMA:~$ ulimit -aS | grep "open files"
open files                          (-n) 2000
chan@CMA:~$ ulimit -aH | grep "open files"
open files                          (-n) 2000
chan@CMA:~$ ulimit -n 3000
bash: ulimit: open files: cannot modify limit: Operation not permitted
```

- The current soft limit is 1024 (the default).
- The soft limit is 1024 and the hard limit is 1048576.
- Using `ulimit` ,we set the limit to 3,000; this internally has caused both the soft and hard limits to be set to 3,000.
- Attempting to set the value higher (to 3,001) fails.
- Reducing the value to 2,000 succeeds
- Both the soft and hard limits have been set to 2,000.
- Attempting to go back to a previously valid value fails (3,000). this is because the valid range is now [0, 2000].