# Saving Data on the Stack

- The actual value of the stack pointer is going to be changing as pushes and pops are made in our code.
- Thus, rather than actually refer to local values using the stack pointer, the ABI uses `%rbp` to store the value of the current stack frame.
- All local values will be referenced as offsets to `%rbp` and `%rsp` will be modified as needed during pushes, pops and function calls.
- When starting a function, we should first save the value of `%rbp`. (required to be preserved) 
  - This is the first thing that should be done.
- After pushing the value of `%rbp` onto the stack, `%rsp` should be copied to `%rbp`.
  - This makes `%rbp` point to the previous version of itself.
- Subtracting the value from `%rsp` is what reserves the space so that any function calls that the present function makes won't cause its local variables to be overwritten.
- Unlike `%rsp`, which changes as data is pushed or popped from the stack, `%rbp` remains constant throughout the function. This makes it easier to access local variables and arguments.

```assembly
# save the pointer to the previous stack frame
pushq %rbp

# copy the stack pointer to the base pointer for a fixed reference point
movq %rsp, %rbp

# reserve however much memory on the stack we need
subq $NUMBYTES, %rsp
```

- At the end of the function, these steps should be reserved:

```assembly
# restore the stack pointer
movq %rbp, %rsp
# restore the base pointer
popq %rbp
```

---

## Enter & Leave

**`enter`**: The `enter` instruction simply takes a value that is the amount of additional memory we want on the stack and does all three steps for us. THus, the code for creating a stack frame in a function can be replaced with:

```assembly
enter $NUMBYTES, $0
```

- The 2nd param is used for "closures".
- No need to worry when writing assembly language directly.
- But the `enter` is much slower than the equivalent set of instructions given above.

`leave`: The code for tearing down a stack frame can be replaced simply with:

```assembly
leave
```

- The `leave` instruction is faster than the instructions it is replacing.