# Scheduling policies

- A key job of the OS is to schedule runnable tasks.
- The POSIX standard states that a POSIX-compliant OS must provide at least 3 scheduling policies.
- A scheduling policy is really the scheduling algorithm used by the OS to schedule tasks.

**Important scheduling policies:**

- `SCHED_FIFO`
- `SCHED_RR`
- `SCHED_OTHER` (`SCHED_NORMAL`)



- Vanilla Linux OS is not an RTOS: it does not support hard real-time and is classified as a **General Purpose Operating System (GPOS)**, like the others - Unix, Windows, and MacOS.
- Linux, tho a GPOS, easily performs as a soft real-time system.
  - Its high performance characteristics bring it close to being a firm real-time system.
  - Hence, Linux OS is predominately used in consumer electronics.
- `SCHED_FIFO` and `SCHED_RR` are Linux's soft real-time scheduling policies.
- `SCHED_OTHER` policy is the non-real-time scheduling policy and is always the default one.
- The `SCHED_OTHER` policy is implemented on modern Linux kernels as the **Completely Fair Scheduler (CFS)**.
  - To provide overall high system throughput and fairness to every runnable task (thread), ensuring a thread does not starve.

| Scheduling Policy | Type                                           | Priority range          |
| ----------------- | ---------------------------------------------- | ----------------------- |
| `SCHED_FIFO`      | Soft real-time: Aggressive, unfair             | 1 to 99                 |
| `SCHED_RR`        | Soft real-time: Less aggressive                | 1 to 99                 |
| `SCHED_OTHER`     | Non real-time: Fair, time-sharing: the default | Nice value (-20 to +19) |

- Aggressive here means `SCHED_FIFO` runs with infinite timeslice, and unless it blocks (or is stopped or killed), will continue to run on the processor indefinitely.
- `SCHED_RR` is identical to `SCHED_FIFO` except:
  - It has a finite timeslice, and thus an additional scenario under which it can be preempted: when its timeslice expires.
  - When preempted, the task is moved to the tail of the run queue for its priority level, ensuring that all `SCHED_RR` tasks at the same priority level are executed in turn.
- **`SCHED_FIFO`:**
  - Runs tasks until they yield, block, or a higher priority task preempts them.
  - No time slicing among tasks with the same priority.
- **`SCHED_RR`:**
  - Implements time slicing for tasks at the same priority.
  - Ensures that tasks share CPU time in a round-robin manner.

- All threads run under the `SCHED_OTHER` scheduling policy by default.
- The "nice" value for `SCHED_OTHER` processes is a user-adjustable parameter that expresses how "polite" or "selfish" a process should be with respect to CPU usage. 
- The range from -20 to +19 was chosen historically in Unix-like systems to provide a 40-level scale:
  - **Negative values (e.g., -20):**
    - Indicate that the process is less "nice"—in other words, it requests more CPU time and is given a higher scheduling priority. 
    - The process is considered more aggressive.
  - **Positive values (e.g., +19):**
    - Indicate that the process is more "nice," meaning it is willing to yield CPU time to other processes. 
    - A higher nice value lowers its scheduling priority.
  - **Default Value (0):**
    - Typically, processes start with a nice value of 0, which is considered neutral.

## Peeking at the scheduling policy and priority

- `chrt(1)` utility to view and change a thread's (or process) real-time scheduling policy and priority.

```sh
chan@CMA:~$ chrt -p $$
pid 3385's current scheduling policy: SCHED_OTHER
pid 3385's current scheduling priority: 0
```

- The policy is almost always `SCHED_OTHER` and that the real-time priority is zero.
- A real-time priority of zero implies that the process is not real time.