# Introduction to users and groups

- PostgreSQL distinguishes between users and group of users.
  - The former represents someone either a person or an application, that could connect to the cluster and perform activities.
  - The latter represents a collection of users that share some common properties.
- A role can be a single account, a group of accounts or even both depending on ho we design it.
  - But a role should express one and only one concept at a time. (a single user or group, not both).
- A role represents a collection of database permissions and connection properties.
- Since a role is defined at a cluster level, it must have a unique name within the entire cluster.

## Managing Roles

- `CREATE ROLE` or `ALTER ROLE`

```postgresql
CREATE ROLE name [[WITH] option [...]]
```

- Unlike other systems, in PostgreSQL, we can have as many superusers as we want.

- `DROP ROLE` to remove an existing role.

```postgresql
CREATE ROLE chan WITH LOGIN PASSWORD 'xxx';
```

- The following role will be prevented from logging in after Christmas 2030.

```postgresql
CREATE ROLE chan WITH LOGIN PASSWORD 'xxx' VALID UNTIL '2030-12-25 23:59'
```



## Role vs Group

- In PostgreSQL, **roles** and **groups** are both part of the database's access control system, and they're actually the **same underlying object** with different use cases.

### **Role (in PostgreSQL)**

A **role** is an entity that can own database objects and have database privileges. Roles can:

- Log in (if they have the `LOGIN` attribute)
- Own tables, schemas, etc.
- Be granted privileges (like `SELECT`, `INSERT`)
- Be assigned to other roles (nested roles or "group-like" behavior)

You create a role like this:

```postgresql
CREATE ROLE alice WITH LOGIN PASSWORD 'securepassword';
```

You can also create a role without login (for group use):

```postgresql
CREATE ROLE staff;
```

### **Group (in PostgreSQL)**

- Historically, **groups** were separate from roles, but since PostgreSQL 8.1, **groups are just roles without the LOGIN privilege**.

- So when someone talks about a "group," they usually mean a role **used to group users together** for permission management.

```postgresql
-- Create a group role
CREATE ROLE developers;

-- Assign users to the group
GRANT developers TO alice;
GRANT developers TO bob;

-- Grant privileges to the group
GRANT SELECT, INSERT ON ALL TABLES IN SCHEMA public TO developers;
```

- This way, all members of the `developers` group get the same access.



## Using a role as a group

- A group is a role that contains other roles.
- Usually, when we want to create a group, all we need to do is create a role without the `LOGIN` option and then add all the members one after the other to the **containing role**.
- In order to create a role as a member of a specific group, the `IN ROLE` option can be used.

```bash
postgres=# CREATE ROLE book_authors WITH NOLOGIN;
CREATE ROLE
postgres=# CREATE ROLE chann WITH LOGIN PASSWORD 'xxx' IN ROLE book_authors;
CREATE ROLE
postgres=# CREATE ROLE enrico WITH LOGIN PASSWORD 'xxx' IN ROLE book_authors;
```

- Via the special `GRANT` statement, we can add members to a group.
  - It is a general SQL statement that allows fine privilege tuning.
  - PostgreSQL extends the SQL syntax allowing the granting of a role to another role.
- When granting a role to another, the latter becomes  a member of the former.
- Assuming that all roles already exist without any particular association, the following adds the role `enrico` to the `book_authors` group.

```bash
postgres=# GRANT book_authors TO enrico;
NOTICE:  role "enrico" has already been granted membership in role "book_authors" by role "postgres"
GRANT ROLE
```

- Every group can have one or more **admin** members, which are allowed to add new members to the group.
- The `ADMIN` option allows a user to specify the member that will be associated as an administrator of the newly created group.
- In the following code block, the creation of new group called `book_reviewers` with `chann` as administrator;  this means that the user `chann` , even if he is not a cluster superuser, will be able to add new members to the `book_reviewers` group.

```bash
postgres=# CREATE ROLE book_reviewers
postgres-# WITH NOLOGIN
postgres-# ADMIN chann;
CREATE ROLE
```

- Clearly, the `ADMIN` option can be used in `CREATE ROLE` only if the administrator role already exist.
- The `GRANT` statement can solve the problem, the `WITH ADMIN OPTION` clause allows the membership of a role with administrative privileges.
- The following code shows how to make the user `enrico` also an administrator of the `book_reviewers` group.

```bash
postgres=# GRANT book_reviewers TO enrico
postgres-# WITH ADMIN OPTION;
GRANT ROLE
```

- What happens if a group role has the `LOGIN` option? 
  - The group will still be a role container, but it can act also as a single user account with the ability to log in. 
  - While this is possible, it is a more common practice to deny group roles access to log in to prevent confusion.