## Chapter 8 - Unicode and wide characters



```C
void toMorse(char c){
    // arrays declared as const char to keep the code from otherwise messing with them; this type of construction dislikes being manipulated.
    const char *morse_alpha[] = {
        ".-", "-...", "-.-.", "-..", ".", "..-.",
        "--.", "....", "..", ".---", "-.-", ".-..",
        "--", "-.", "---", ".--.", "--.-", ".-.",
        "...", "-", "..-", "...-", ".--", "-..-",
        "-.--", "--.."};
    const char *morse_digit[] = {
        "-----", ".----", "..---", "...--", "....-",
        ".....", "-....", "--...", "---..", "----."};
	
    // Pulls out alphabetic characters
    if(isalpha(c)){
        c = toupper(c);
        
        // Subtracts the character from 'A' to print the corresponding Morse code for the alphabetic character
        printf("%s ", morse_alpha[c - 'A']);
    }else if(isdigit(c)){ // Checks for digits 0 thru 9
        
        // Subtracts the digit from '0' to print the corresponding Morse code for the digit
        printf("%s ", morse_digit(c - '0'));
    }else if(c == ' ' || c == '\n'){
        putchar('\n');
    }else{
        return;
    }
}

int main(){
    int ch;
    while((ch = getchar()) != EOF){
        toMorse(ch);
    }
    return 0;
}
```

- The `toMorse()` function is easily set into a filter, which translates text input into Morse code strings for output.

### Visualization

Let's visualize the process with the example string `"Hey it's an honor 123"`.

1. **Initial State**:

   ```
   Input: "Hey it's an honor 123"
   ```

   

2. **Character-by-Character Conversion**:

   - `H`: Convert to Morse code `....`
   - `e`: Convert to Morse code `.`
   - `y`: Convert to Morse code `-.--`
   - ``: Print newline to separate words
   - `i`: Convert to Morse code `..`.
   - `t`: Convert to Morse code `-`
   - `'`: Ignore
   - `s`: Convert to Morse code `...`
   - ``: Print newline to separate words
   - `a`: Convert to Morse code `.-`
   - `n`: Convert to Morse code `-.`
   - ``: Print newline to separate words
   - `h`: Convert to Morse code `....`
   - `o`: Convert to Morse code `---`
   - `n`: Convert to Morse code `-.`
   - `o`: Convert to Morse code `---`
   - `r`: Convert to Morse code `.-.`
   - ``: Print newline to separate words
   - `1`: Convert to Morse code `.----`
   - `2`: Convert to Morse code `..---`
   - `3`: Convert to Morse code `...--`

```sh
chan@CMA:~/C_Programming/test$ ./final
Hey it's an honor 123
.... . -.-- 
.. - ... 
.- -. 
.... --- -. --- .-. 
.---- ..--- ...-- 
```



### Understanding Unicode and Wide Characters

1. **Unicode**:
   - Unicode is a standard for encoding text in different writing systems. It assigns a unique code point to each character, regardless of the platform, program, or language.
   - UTF-8 is a variable-width character encoding for Unicode. It can represent any character in the Unicode standard and is backward compatible with ASCII.
2. **Wide Characters**:
   - In C, wide characters are used to represent Unicode characters. They are typically stored in `wchar_t` type variables.
   - Wide character strings are arrays of `wchar_t` and are manipulated using functions from the `<wchar.h>` library.

### Setting the locale

In C, locales are used to define various cultural-specific settings that affect the behavior of certain functions, such as those related to formatting, character classification, and string collation. 

The `setlocale` function is used to set or query the program's current locale.



- A locale is a set of parameters that defines the user's language, country, and any special variant preferences. 
- These parameters affect the behavior of various functions in the C standard library, such as:
  - **Character classification and conversion**: Functions like `isalpha`, `isdigit`, `toupper`, and `tolower` depend on the locale to determine character properties.
  - **String collation and comparison**: Functions like `strcoll` and `strxfrm` use locale-specific rules for comparing and transforming strings.
  - **Date and time formatting**: Functions like `strftime` use locale-specific formats for representing dates and times.
  - **Number formatting**: Functions like `printf` and `scanf` use locale-specific rules for formatting numbers, including decimal points and thousands separators.

```sh
chan@CMA:~/C_Programming/test$ locale
LANG=en_SG.UTF-8
LANGUAGE=en_SG:en
LC_CTYPE="en_SG.UTF-8"
LC_NUMERIC="en_SG.UTF-8"
LC_TIME="en_SG.UTF-8"
LC_COLLATE="en_SG.UTF-8"
LC_MONETARY="en_SG.UTF-8"
LC_MESSAGES="en_SG.UTF-8"
LC_PAPER="en_SG.UTF-8"
LC_NAME="en_SG.UTF-8"
LC_ADDRESS="en_SG.UTF-8"
LC_TELEPHONE="en_SG.UTF-8"
LC_MEASUREMENT="en_SG.UTF-8"
LC_IDENTIFICATION="en_SG.UTF-8"
LC_ALL=
```

- The UTF-8 character format is what allows Unicode text I/O - though to enable UTF-8 in our code, we must use the `setlocale()` function, prototyped in the `locale.h` header file.

```C
char *setlocale(int category, const char *locale);
```

- The first argument, `category` is a defined constant representing which aspect of the locale we want to set. Common categories include:
  - `LC_ALL`: All locale settings.
  - `LC_COLLATE`: String collation (comparison) rules.
  - `LC_CTYPE`: Character classification and conversion.
  - `LC_MONETARY`: Monetary formatting.
  - `LC_NUMERIC`: Number formatting (decimal point, thousands separator).
  - `LC_TIME`: Date and time formatting.
- The second argument is a string to set the specific locale details.
  - For example, for text, we can specify "en_SG.UTF-8" which activates the 8-bit Unicode character set for English. An empty string can also be specified.
  - `""`: The default locale, usually determined by the environment variables.
  - `"C"`: The standard C locale, which is the default locale when a program starts.
  - `"en_US.UTF-8"`, `"fr_FR.UTF-8"`, etc.: Specific locales for different languages and regions.
- The `setlocale()` function returns a string representing the specific information requested.
- If the locale is not supported, it returns `NULL`.
- We need not use the string; setting the locale is good enough for wide character I/O.



The following program uses the `setlocale()` function to output locale details - specifically the character set in use.

- Line 8 uses the `setlocale()` function to return a string describing the current locale, saved in variable `locale`.
- Used in this way, the `setlocale()` function doesn't change the locale settings; it only reports information.

```C
#include <locale.h>

int main(){
    
    // Pointer to a string to retain the function's output
    char *locale;
    
    // Synchronizes the GPU so that the work completes
    locale = setlocale(LC_ALL, "");
    printf("The current locale is %s\n", locale);
    return 0;
}
```

```sh
chan@CMA:~/C_Programming/test$ ./final
The current locale is en_SG.UTF-8
```



### Exploring character types

To invoke the magic that enables access to Unicode's humongous character set, we must be familiar with the three types of characters used in computerdom:

- Single-byte characters
- Wide characters
- Multi-byte characters



**Single-byte characters**: 

- provide the traditional way to generate text.
- These are 8-bit values, the `char` data type, equal to a single byte of storage.
- Though `char` values range from 0 through 255 (unsigned), only values 0 through 127 are assigned characters using the ASCII standard.



**Wide characters**:

- The wide character data type uses more than 8-bits to encode text.
- The number of bytes can vary, depending on the character.
- In C, the `wchar_t` data type handles wide characters, and the wide character (wchar) family of functions manipulate these characters.



**Multi-byte characters**:

- A multibyte character requires several bytes to represent the character.
- This description includes wide characters but also characters that require a prefix byte, or lead unit, and then another sequence of bytes to represent a single character.
- This type of multibyte character may be used in specific applications and computer platforms.



To represent a single-byte character, we use the `char` data type in C.

```C
char hash = '#';
```

- The hash character is assigned to `char` variable `hash`.
- The character code is 35 decimal, 23 hex.



To represent wide characters, use the `wchar_t` data type.  We must include `wchar.h` header file which also prototypes the various wide character functions.

```C
wchar_t yen = 0xa5;
```

- The Yen character ¥ is U+00a5. 
- The value is assigned to `wchar_t` variable `yen`.



```C
wchar_t yen = L'¥';
```

- The `L` prefix defines the character as long (wide).
- This prefix works like the `L` suffix applied to `long` integer values: `123L` indicates the value `123` specified as a `long int` value.

The `L` prefix is also used to declare a wide character string.

```C
wchar_t howdy[] = L"Hello, planet Earth!";
```

- The string above, "Hello, planet Earth!", is composed of wide characters, thanks to the `L` prefix.
- The `wchar_t` data type declares wide string `howdy`.



As with single characters, we cannot insert special characters into a wide string. The following declaration is flagged as illegal character encoding:

```C
wchar_t monetary[] = L"$¥€₤";
```

- Such a string is instead composed in this manner:

```C
wchar_t monetary[] = {
    0x24, 0xa5, 0x20ac, 0xa3, 0x0
}
```

- Hex values above represent the characters dollar sign, yen, euro, and British pound, followed by the null character caboose to terminate the string.
- To output wide characters and wide strings, use the `wprintf()` function.
  - This function works like the standard library `printf()` function, though it deals with wide strings.
- Special placeholders are used for wide characters and wide strings:
  - The `%lc` placeholder represents a single wide character.
  - The `%ls` placeholder represents a wide string.
- Lowercase `l` in the placeholder identifies the target variable as the wide or `wchar_t` data type.



### Generating wide character output

- To output wide characters in C, we have to employ the functions declared in the `wchar.h` header file, which also conveniently defines the `wchar_t` data type.
- We also need the `locale.h` header file because the wide character functions must be activated by first setting the locale.

```C
#include <wchar.h>

int main(){
    wprintf(L"Hello, wide world!\n");
    return 0;
}
```

- The `setlocale()` function isn't required because the output is ASCII, albeit wide ASCII, which is why the `wprintf()` formatting string is prefixed by an `L` (long, or wide character).

```sh
chan@CMA:~/C_Programming/test$ ./final
Hello, wide world!
```

```C
int main()
{
    wchar_t hello[] = L"Hello, wide world!\n";
    wprintf(L"%ls", hello);
    return (0);
}

```

- The `wchar_t` data type defines array `hello[]` composed of characters present in the wide string.
- If the `L` prefix is omitted, the compiler barfs up a data type mismatch error and the code won't compile.
- To create a wide string, we need both the `wchar_t` data type and the `L` prefix on the text enclosed in double quotes.
- `wprintf(L"%ls", hello)`: The `L` prefix is required for the formatting string, because all wide character functions deal with wide characters. 
  - The `%ls` placeholder represents a string of wide characters.

```sh
chan@CMA:~/C_Programming/test$ ./final
Hello, wide world!
```



To output a single wide character, use the `putwchar()` function. It works like `putchar()`.



The code in the next listing outputs the four playing card suits: spades, hearts, clubs, and diamonds.

- Their unicode values are assigned as elements of the `suits[]` array.
- The `setlocale()` function is required because these are not ASCII characters.
- Within the `for` loop, the `putwchar()` function outputs the characters.
- A final `putwchar()` function outputs a newline - a wide newline.



```C
#include <wchar.h>
#include <locale.h>

int main(){
    const int count = 4;
    
    // Unicode values for four playing card suits
    wchar_t suits[] = {
        0x2660, 0x2665, 0x2663, 0x2666
    };
    
    int x;
    
    // The locale is set because these are not ASCII characters.
    setlocale(LC_CTYPE, "en_SG.UTF-8");
    
    for(x = 0; x < count; x++){
        putwchar(suits[x]);
    }
    
    putwchar('\n');
    return 0;
}
```

- `LC_CTYPE`: Character classification and conversion.

```sh
chan@CMA:~/C_Programming/test$ ./final
♠♥♣♦
```



In the following listing, three Unicode strings are declared in the `main()` function.

- Each one ends with newline and null characters.
- The `fputws()` function sends strings as the output to the `stdout` device.
  - This function is equivalent to `fputs()` function.



```C
#include <wchar.h>
#include <stdio.h>
#include <locale.h>

int main(){
    // Russian word "Привет!" (Hello!)
    wchar_t russian[] = {
        0x41f, 0x440, 0x438, 0x432, 0x435, 0x442, '!', '\n', '\0'};

    // Chinese word "你好" (Hello)
    wchar_t chinese[] = {
        0x4f60, 0x597d, '\n', '\0'};

    // Emoji "👋" (Waving Hand)
    wchar_t emoji[] = {
        0x1f44b, '\n', '\0'};

    // Set the locale to UTF-8
    setlocale(LC_ALL, "en_SG.UTF-8");

    // Print the wide character strings
    fputws(russian, stdout);
    fputws(chinese, stdout);
    fputws(emoji, stdout);

    return 0;
}
```

```sh
chan@CMA:~/C_Programming/test$ make all
Compiling the main file
clang -std=c23 -Wall -Wextra -g -D_XOPEN_SOURCE=700 -c main.c -o ./obj/main.o
Linking and producing the final application
clang -std=c23 -Wall -Wextra -g -D_XOPEN_SOURCE=700 ./obj/main.o -L./libs -lhello -o final -lssl -lcrypto -lpthread -lm

chan@CMA:~/C_Programming/test$ ./final
Привет!
伱好
👋
```



- The inability of some typefaces to properly render portions of the Unicode character set is something we should always consider when coding wide text output.
- Not every string we output requires all wide text characters, such as those strings shown in the next listing.
- In face, most often we may find a single character required in a string of otherwise typable, plain ASCII text.
- One way to sneak such a character into a string is demonstrated here.

```C
#include <wchar.h>
#include <locale.h>

int main(){
    // The character is specified by its Unicode value, U-00A5.
    wchar_t yen = 0xa5;
    setlocale(LC_CTYPE, "en_SG.UTF-8");
    
    wprintf(L"That will be %lc500\n", yen);
    
    return 0;
}
```

```sh
chan@CMA:~/C_Programming/test$ ./final
That will be ¥500
```



Another way to insert a non-ASCII Unicode character in a string is substitution.

- For example, we can create a wide character string of ASCII text, then plop in a specific character before the string is output.



First, we create a wide character string with a placeholder for the untypable Unicode character:

```C
wchar_t s[] = L"That will be $500\n";
```

The next step is to replace this element with the proper wide character:

```C
s[13] = 0xa5; // Jpn yen 
```

This assignment works because all characters in string `s[]` are wide. Character code `0xa5` replaces the dollar sign.



**Exercise 8.1**

Create a program that outputs this text: `I ♥ to code.`

The unicode value for the heart symbol is U+2665.

```C
int main()
{
    wchar_t s[] = L"I * to code.";
    setlocale(LC_CTYPE, "en_SG.UTF-8");
    s[2] = 0x2665;
    wprintf(L"%ls\n", s);

    return 0;
}
```

```sh
chan@CMA:~/C_Programming/test$ ./final
I ♥ to code.
```



### Receiving wide character input

The following listing uses the `getwchar()` function to process standard input, including wide characters.

- The single character input is echoed back in the `wprintf()` statement.
- The `%lc` placeholder represents `wchar_t` variable `mood`.

```C
#include <locale.h>
#include <wchar.h>

int main(){
    
    // The single wide character variable mood holds input
    wchar_t mood;
    
    setlocale(LC_CTYPE, "en_SG.UTF-8");
    
    wprintf(L"What is your mood? ");
    
    // Obtail a wide character from standard input and stores it in wchar_t variable mood
    mood = getwchar();
    wprintf(L"I feel %lc, too!\n", mood);
    
    return 0;
}
```

```sh
chan@CMA:~/C_Programming/test$ ./final
What is your mood? 7
I feel 7, too!
chan@CMA:~/C_Programming/test$ ./final
What is your mood? ¥ 
I feel ¥, too!
```

- The program reads from standard input, though any text we type is represented internally by using wide characters.
- Therefore, the program runs whether we type a Unicode character or any other keyboard character.
- However, the true test is to type a Unicode character, specifically an emoji.

#### Typing Miscellaneous Symbols in Ubuntu Linux

CTRL + SHIFT + u then, the code number. For example,

- The Unicode for a coffee cup symbol is U+2615. 
- So when we want to output that in the terminal window, we have to press CTRL + SHIFT + u, then the underscored <u>`u`</u> will appear.  
- Then type the number 2615 right after the underscored u and we'll get our coffee cup emoji.

```sh
chan@CMA:~/C_Programming/test$ ./final
What is your mood? ☕
I feel ☕, too!
```

The Umbrella Symbol Unicode - U+2602

```sh
chan@CMA:~/C_Programming/test$ ./final
What is your mood? ☂
I feel ☂, too!
```



To read more than a single character, use the `fgetws()` function. 

- This function is the wide character version of `fgets()`, with a similar set of arguments.

```C
wchar_t *fgetws(wchar_t *ws, int n, FILE *stream);
```

- The first argument is a `wchar_t` buffer to store input.
- Then comes the buffer size, which is the input character count minus one for the null character, which is automatically added.
- Finally, the file stream, such as `stdin` for standard input.
- The `fgetws()` function returns the buffer's address upon success or NULL otherwise.

The next listing shows how the `fgetws()` function is used.

- The wide character buffer `input` stores wide characters read from the standard input device (`stdin`).
- A `wprintf()` function outputs the characters stored in the `input` buffer.

```C
#include <stdio.h>
#include <wchar.h>
#include <locale.h>

int main(){
    // Uses a constant to set the buffer size
    const int size = 32;
    wchar_t input[size];
    
    setlocale(LC_CTYPE, "en_SG.UTF-8");
    
    wprintf(L"Type some fancy text: ");
    
    // Reads the size characters into the input buffer from standard input
    fgetws(input, size, stdin);
    wprintf(L"You typed: '%ls'\n", input);
    
    return 0;
}
```

```sh
chan@CMA:~/C_Programming/test$ ./final
Type some fancy text: ☂
You typed: '☂
'
chan@CMA:~/C_Programming/test$ ./final
Type some fancy text: 你好，世界
You typed: '你好，世界
'
```

- As with standard input and the `fgets()` function, the newline character is retained in the input string.

**Exercise 8.2**

When the string is shorter than the maximum number of characters allowed, the newline is retained in the string. Your tasks is to modify the source code so that any newline in the string is removed from output. One way to accomplish this tasks is to write your won output function. That's too easy. Instead, you must create a function that removes the newline added by the `fgetws()` function, effectively trimming the string.

```C
#include <stdio.h>
#include <wchar.h>
#include <locale.h>

void remove_newline(wchar_t *str){
    while(*str){
        if(*str == '\n'){
            *str = '\0';
            break;
        }
        str++;
    }
}

int main(){
    const int size = 32;
    wchar_t input[size];
    
    setlocale(LC_CTYPE, "en_SG.UTF-8");
    
    wprintf(L"Type some fancy text: ");
    fgetws(input, size, stdin);
    remove_newline(input);
    wprintf(L"You typed: ' %ls '\n", input);
}
```

```sh
chan@CMA:~/C_Programming/test$ ./final
Type some fancy text: ♅
You typed: ' ♅ '
```

Another wide input function is `wscanf()`.

- This function is based on `scanf()`.

```C
int wscanf(const wchar_t *restrict format, ...);
```

- This format is identical to that of `scanf()` function, though the formatting string (the first argument) is composed of wide characters.

```C
#include <wchar.h>
#include <locale.h>

int main(){
    // The pound character is defined as a wchar_t constant.
    const wchar_t pound = 0xa3;
    int quantity;
    float total;

    setlocale(LC_CTYPE, "en_SG.UTF-8");

    wprintf(L"How many crisps do you want? ");
    wscanf(L"%d", &quantity);
    total = quantity * 1.4;
    wprintf(L"That'll be %lc%.2f\n", pound, total);

    return 0;
}
```

```sh
chan@CMA:~/C_Programming/test$ ./final
How many crisps do you want? 2
That'll be £2.80
chan@CMA:~/C_Programming/test$ ./final
How many crisps do you want? 4
That'll be £5.60
```



### Working with wide characters in files

- The `wchar.h` header files also defines wide character equivalents of file I/O functions available in the standard C library.
  - For example, `fputwc()` to send a wide character to stream, the equivalent of `fputc()`.
  - These wide character functions are paired with the standard library file I/O functions, such as `fopen()`.
- As with standard I/O, our wide character file functions must set the locale.
- The file must be opened for reading, writing, or both.
- Wide character file I/O functions are used to put and get text from the file.
- The `WEOF` constant is used to identify the wide end-of-file character, `wint_t` data type.
- Once the file activity is done, the file is closed.



As an example, consider code to output 24 uppercase letters of the Greek alphabet, alpha to omega, A(U+0391) to Ω (U+03A9), saving the alphabet to a file.

- The Unicode values increment successively for each letter, though a blank spot exists at code U+03B1.
- The uppercase blank spot keeps the upper- and lowercase values parallel, as two lowercase sigma characters are used in Greek.

```C
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <wchar.h>
#include <locale.h>

int main(){
    const wchar_t alpha = 0x391; // Unicode for Greek capital letter Alpha (Α)
    const wchar_t omega = 0x3a9; // Unicode for Greek capital letter Omega (Ω)
    const wchar_t no_sigma = 0x3a2; // Unicode for a non-existent Greek letter (reserved)
    const char *file = "alphabeta.wtxt";
    FILE *fp;
    wchar_t a;
    
    fp = fopen(file, "w");
    if(fp == NULL){
        fprintf(stder, "Unable to open %s\n", file);
        exit(1);
    }
    
    setlocale(LC_CTYPE, "en_SG.UTF-8");
    
    wprintf(L"Writing the Greek alphabet...\n");
    
    // Loop through the Greek alphabet from Alpha to Omega
    for(a = alpha; a <= omega; a++){
        if(a == no_sigma){
            continue; // Skip the non-existent Greek letter
        }
        
        // Write the character to the file and to the console
        fputwc(a, fp);
        fputwc(a, stdout);
    }
    
    fputwc('\0', fp);
    fclose(fp);
    wprintf(L"\nDone\n");
    return 0;
}
```

- After the file is created, the uppercase Greek characters are written to the file one at a time, using a `for` loop.
- Constants `alpha` and `omega` represent the first and last characters' Unicode values.
- The `wchar_t` constant `no_sigma` is used in an `if` test with the loop so that its character (U+03A2, which is blank) is skipped.

```sh
chan@CMA:~/C_Programming/test$ ./final
Writing the Greek alphabet...
ΑΒΓΔΕΖΗΘΙΚΛΜΝΞΟΠΡΣΤΥΦΧΨΩ
Done.
```

`alphabeta.wtxt`

```
ΑΒΓΔΕΖΗΘΙΚΛΜΝΞΟΠΡΣΤΥΦΧΨΩ
```



The next listing shows the file-reading code.

- Traditional file I/O commands open the file.
- The locale is set.
- Then the `fgetws()` function does its magic to read the uppercase alphabet wide string.
- The line is output, and the file is closed.

```C
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <wchar.h>
#include <locale.h>

int main(){
    const char *file = "alphabeta.wtxt";
    const int length = 64;
    FILE *fp;
    
    // The wide character input buffer
    wchar_t line[length];
    
    fp = fopen(file, "r");
    if(fp == NULL){
        fprintf(stderr, "Unable to open %s\n", file);
        exit(1);
    }
    
    setlocale(LC_CTYPE, "en_SG.UTF-8");
    
   	wprintf(L"Reading from %s\n", file);
    fgetws(line, length, fp);
    wprintf(L"%ls\n", line);
    fclose(fp);
    return 0;
}
```

- Because the earlier program where we write Greek alphabets to "alphabeta.wtxt" file, we added a null character to the end, the `fgetws()` function here reads text from the file in one chunk like the `fgets()` function.
- `fgetws()` stops reading when it encounters the null byte, a newline, or the buffer fills.

```sh
chan@CMA:~/C_Programming/test$ ./final
Reading from alphabeta.wtxt
ΑΒΓΔΕΖΗΘΙΚΛΜΝΞΟΠΡΣΤΥΦΧΨΩ
```



To read one wide character at a time from a file, use the `fgetwc()` function, which is the wide character counterpart of `fgetc()`.

- Like `fgetc()`, the value returned by `fgetwc()` isn't a character or even a wide character. It's a wide integer.

```C
wint_t fgetwc(FILE *stream);
```

- The function's argument is an open file handle, or `stdin` for standard input.

- The value returned is of the `wint_t` data type.

- As with `fgetc()`, the reason is that the wide end-of-file marker, `WEOF`, can be encountered, which the `wchar_t` type doesn't interpret properly.

- To modify the above program to read single characters from the file, only a few changes are required:

  - The `line[]` buffer is removed, along with the `length` constant. 

  - In its place, a single `wint_t` variable is declared:

  - ```C
    wint_t ch;
    ```

  - To read from the file, the `fgetws()` statement, as well as the `wprintf()` statement are replaced with:

  - ```C
    while((ch = fgetwc(fp)) != WEOF){
        putchar(ch);
    }
    putchar('\n');
    ```

  - The `while` loop's condition both reads a character (a `wint_t` value) from the open file handle `fp`.

  - This value is compared with `WEOF`, the wide character end-of-file marker.

  - As long as the character isn't the end of file, the loop repeats.

  - The loop's sole statement is `putwchar(ch)`, which outputs the character read.

  - A final `putwchar()` statement outputs a newline, cleaning up the output.

**Complete Program**

```C
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <wchar.h>
#include <locale.h>

int main(){
    const char *file = "alphabeta.wtxt";
    FILE *fp;
    wint_t ch;
    
    fp = fopen(file, "r");
    if(fp == NULL){
        fprintf(stderr, "Unable to open %s\n", file);
        exit(1);
    }
    
    setlocale(LC_CTYPE, "en_SG.UTF-8");
    
    wprintf(L"Reading from %s\n", file);
    while((ch = fgetwc(fp)) != WEOF){
        putwchar(ch);
    }
    putwchar('\n');
    
    return 0;
}
```

```sh
chan@CMA:~/C_Programming/test$ ./final
Reading from alphabeta.wtxt
ΑΒΓΔΕΖΗΘΙΚΛΜΝΞΟΠΡΣΤΥΦΧΨΩ
```



**Exercise 8.3**

Create code that writes the Cyrillic alphabet to a file. The first letter of the Cyrillic alphabet, А, is `U+0410`. The last letter is Я, `U+042F`. These are the uppercase letters. Unlike Greek, no blanks are found in the Unicode sequence.



Writing Cyrillic alphabet to a file

```C
int main(){
    const wchar_t cyrillicA = 0x0410;
    const wchar_t cyrillicR = 0x042F;
    
    const char *file = "cyrillic.wtxt";
    FILE *fp;
    wchar_t c;
    
    fp = fopen(file, "w");
    if(fp == NULL){
        fprintf(stderr, "Unable to open %s\n", file);
        exit(1);
    }
    
    setlocale(LC_CTYPE, "en_SG.UTF-8");
    wprintf(L"Writing Cyrillic characters to %s\n", file);
    
    for(c = cyrillicA; c <= cyrillicR; c++){
        fputwc(c, fp);
        fputwc(c, stdout);
    }
    
    fputwc('\0', fp);
    fclose(fp);
    wprintf(L"\nDone\n");
    return 0;
}
```

```sh
chan@CMA:~/C_Programming/test$ ./final
Writing Cyrillic characters to cyrillic.wtxt
АБВГДЕЖЗИЙКЛМНОПРСТУФХЦЧШЩЪЫЬЭЮЯ
Done
```

`cyrillic.wtxt`

```
АБВГДЕЖЗИЙКЛМНОПРСТУФХЦЧШЩЪЫЬЭЮЯ
```



Reading from `cyrillic.wtxt` (`fgetwc()`)

```C
int main(){
    const char *file = "cyrillic.wtxt";
    FILE *fp;
    wint_t ch;

    fp = fopen(file, "r");
    if (fp == NULL)
    {
        fprintf(stderr, "Unable to open %s\n", file);
        exit(1);
    }

    setlocale(LC_CTYPE, "en_SG.UTF-8");

    wprintf(L"Reading Cyrillic characters from %s\n", file);

    while ((ch = fgetwc(fp)) != WEOF)
    {
        putwchar(ch);
    }

    putwchar('\n');

    fclose(fp);

    return 0;
}
```

```sh
chan@CMA:~/C_Programming/test$ ./final
Reading Cyrillic characters from cyrillic.wtxt
АБВГДЕЖЗИЙКЛМНОПРСТУФХЦЧШЩЪЫЬЭЮЯ

```



Reading from `cyrillic.wtxt` (`fgetws()`)

```C
int main()
{
    const char *file = "cyrillic.wtxt";
    const int length = 64;
    FILE *fp;
    wchar_t line[length];

    fp = fopen(file, "r");
    if (fp == NULL)
    {
        fprintf(stderr, "Unable to open %s\n", file);
        exit(1);
    }

    setlocale(LC_CTYPE, "en_SG.UTF-8");

    wprintf(L"Reading Cyrillic characters from %s\n", file);

    while (fgetws(line, length, fp) != NULL)
    {
        wprintf(L"%ls\n", line);
    }

    fclose(fp);

    return 0;
}

```

```sh
chan@CMA:~/C_Programming/test$ ./final
Reading Cyrillic characters from cyrillic.wtxt
АБВГДЕЖЗИЙКЛМНОПРСТУФХЦЧШЩЪЫЬЭЮЯ

```

---

