# Application Binary Interface

Let's imagine that we write a C program, and run it on the machine. 

- C code cannot possibly be directly deciphered by the CPU. It must be converted into machine language. 
- So, we understand that on modern systems we will have a toolchain installed – this includes the compiler, linker, library objects, and various other tools. 
- We compile and link the C source code, converting it into an executable format that can be run on the system.
- The processor **Instruction Set Architecture (ISA)** – documents the machine's instruction formats, the addressing schemes it supports, and its register model. 
- In fact, CPU **Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs)** release a document that describes how the machine works; this document is generally called the **ABI**. 
- The **ABI** describes more than just the ISA. it describes the machine instruction formats, the register set details, the calling convention, the linking semantics, and the executable file format, such as ELF. 

| C source | Assembly Language     | Machine instructions |
| -------- | --------------------- | -------------------- |
| a = 5;   | movl $0x5, -0x4(%rbp) | c7 45 fc 05 00 00 00 |

- When the process runs, at some point it will fetch and execute the machine instruction, producing the desired result. Indeed, that's exactly what a programmable computer is designed to do.



## Accessing a register's content via inline assembly

A C program with inline assembly to access the contents of a CPU register.

#### Code

```c
typedef unsigned long u64;

static u64 get_rcx(void)
{
    u64 rcx_value;
    __asm__ __volatile__(
        "movq $5, %%rcx\n\t" // Set RCX to 5
        "movq %%rcx, %0"     // Move the value of RCX to rcx_value
        : "=r"(rcx_value)    // Output operand
        :                    // No input operands
        : "%rcx"             // Clobbered register
    );
    return rcx_value;
}

int main()
{
    printf("Hello, inline assembly:\n [RCX] = 0x%1lx\n", get_rcx());
    return 0;
}
```



#### Output

```sh
chan@CMA:~/C_Programming/test$ ./final
Hello, inline assembly:
 [RCX] = 0x5
```

