# Creating Constants with `.equ`

- A constant is a value that never changes.
- It is a number that is defined once, then we can reference that constant by name.
- Constants are declared using the `.equ` directive which defines a constant for the assembler.
- We can even define it in another file, as long as the constant is marked as global (using the `.globl` directive), and the files are linked together.



**Creating Constants**:

- The offset from the start of the record is zero (the first value). Let it be the person's weight.
- The next value (person's hair color) is a quadword (8 bytes) into the record.

```assembly
.equ WEIGHT_OFFSET, 0
.equ HAIR_OFFSET, 8
.equ HEIGHT_OFFSET, 16
.equ AGE_OFFSET, 24
```

- If we want to share all of these constants with other files

```assembly
.globl WEIGHT_OFFSET, HAIR_OFFSET, HEIGHT_OFFSET, AGE_OFFSET
```

- Let's say we have the address of our record stored in %rbx, and we want to get the value of the person's age and put it in %rax, We could do that with:

```assembly
movq AGE_OFFSET(%rbx), %rax.
```

- We can also include some basic calculations or even involving other constants.

```assembly
.equ WEIGHT_OFFSET, 0
.equ HAIR_OFFSET, WEIGHT_OFFSET + 8
.equ HEIGHT_OFFSET, HAIR_OFFSET + 8
.equ AGE_OFFSET, HEIGHT_OFFSET + 8
```

- If we subtract two memory address labels, it will give us the number of bytes between them.
- If the labels are of the start and end of a set of records, we can then divide this number by the record size and have the assembler auto-calculate the number of records we have.

```assembly
.equ PERSON_RECORD_SIZE, 32
numpeople:
	# Calculate the num of ppl in array
	.quad (endpeople - people) / PERSON_RECORD_SIZE
people:
	# Array of ppl
	.quad 250, 3, 75, 24
	.quad 250, 4, 70, 11
	.quad 180, 5, 69, 65
endpeople:
```

- Here, the `people` label marks the starting memory address of the data and the `endpeople` labels marks the memory address that immediately follows.
- Subtracting them will give the total number of bytes.
- If we divide it by the record size (`PERSON_RECORD_SIZE`), that tells us the total number of records between those two markers.