# The `mmap` System Call

- In addition to setting the program break, we can use the `mmap` system call (syscall number 9) to request larger blocks from the OS.
- **`mmap`** is a system call that maps files or anonymous memory directly into a process’s address space. 
- It creates a new memory mapping and returns a pointer to the beginning of that mapped area.
- In order that `mmap` and `brk` don't compete with each other, `mmap` usually allocates from much higher up in the address space.
- Unlike `brk`, which asks for specific memory locations, the addresses given by `mmap` are determined by the Linux kernel itself.
- We can use `mmap` to:
  - Map a file or device into memory, which allows file I/O to be performed as if we were reading or writing memory.
  - Allocate memory (using anonymous mapping) without using the traditional heap.
  - Specify various protection flags (read, write, execute) and mapping types (private or shared).
- `mmap` operates on page granularity (typically 4KB pages)
- The return value (in %rax) is the memory address allocated if successful or -1 if not.
- To request a memory block that is two pages long wold require a request like the following:

```assembly
movq $9, %rax # mmap syscall num
movq $0, %rdi # Linux chooses the destination
movq $8192, %rsi # 2 pages of memory
movq $0x03, %rdx # memory should be read-write 
movq $0x22, %r10 # requesting private memory not tied to a file 
movq $-1, %r8 # no file descriptor attached 
movq $0, %r9 # no offset requested 
syscall 
# result in %rax 
```

- To return allocated memory to the OS, use the `munmap` system call (call number 11).
  - It takes two params:
    - The memory address to unmap (%rdi)
    - The size (%rsi).