# The signal mechanism in brief

- A signal can be defined as an asynchronous event that is delivered to a target process.
- Signals are delivered to the target process either by another process or the OS (the kernel) itself.
- At the code level, **a signal is merely an integer value**. More correctly, it is a bit in a bitmask.
- Although the signal may seem like an interrupt, it is not an interrupt.
- An interrupt is a hardware feature, a signal is purely a software mechanism.



## What actually happens when we terminate a program using `CTRL + C` on the Terminal

- When we press `Ctrl+C,` the terminal (or TTY) driver recognizes this key combination as the interrupt character (typically ASCII ETX). 

- Under the hood:

  - **Signal Generation:**
    - The terminal driver sends a `SIGINT` signal to all processes in the foreground process group. 
    - This is managed by the kernel’s line discipline.

  - **Signal Delivery:**
    - The kernel delivers the `SIGINT` signal to each process in that group. 
    - If a process hasn’t installed a custom signal handler for `SIGINT`, it will take the default action, which is to terminate.

  - **Process Termination:**
    - Once `SIGINT` is delivered, processes that do not override the default behavior are terminated, and the kernel cleans up their resources.

- This mechanism allows us to quickly interrupt running processes without having to manually kill each one.

---

## Available signals

- Running the `kill(1)` utility with the `-l` or list option lists the available signals on the platform:

```sh
chan@CMA:~$ kill -l
 1) SIGHUP	 2) SIGINT	 3) SIGQUIT	 4) SIGILL	 5) SIGTRAP
 6) SIGABRT	 7) SIGBUS	 8) SIGFPE	 9) SIGKILL	10) SIGUSR1
11) SIGSEGV	12) SIGUSR2	13) SIGPIPE	14) SIGALRM	15) SIGTERM
16) SIGSTKFLT	17) SIGCHLD	18) SIGCONT	19) SIGSTOP	20) SIGTSTP
21) SIGTTIN	22) SIGTTOU	23) SIGURG	24) SIGXCPU	25) SIGXFSZ
26) SIGVTALRM	27) SIGPROF	28) SIGWINCH	29) SIGIO	30) SIGPWR
31) SIGSYS	34) SIGRTMIN	35) SIGRTMIN+1	36) SIGRTMIN+2	37) SIGRTMIN+3
38) SIGRTMIN+4	39) SIGRTMIN+5	40) SIGRTMIN+6	41) SIGRTMIN+7	42) SIGRTMIN+8
43) SIGRTMIN+9	44) SIGRTMIN+10	45) SIGRTMIN+11	46) SIGRTMIN+12	47) SIGRTMIN+13
48) SIGRTMIN+14	49) SIGRTMIN+15	50) SIGRTMAX-14	51) SIGRTMAX-13	52) SIGRTMAX-12
53) SIGRTMAX-11	54) SIGRTMAX-10	55) SIGRTMAX-9	56) SIGRTMAX-8	57) SIGRTMAX-7
58) SIGRTMAX-6	59) SIGRTMAX-5	60) SIGRTMAX-4	61) SIGRTMAX-3	62) SIGRTMAX-2
63) SIGRTMAX-1	64) SIGRTMAX
```

- Where are the signals numbered 32 and 33?
  - Answer: They are internally used by the Linux Pthreads implementation (called NPTL), and are hence unavailable to app developers.

---

