# Reentrant functions

- A reentrant function is one that can be reentered while an ongoing invocation is still running before its previous execution is complete even by an interrupt or concurrently in multiple threads without causing data corruption or unpredictable behavior.
- This is achieved by ensuring that the func:
  - **Does Not Use Shared or Static Data:**
    - It only uses local variables or data passed in via arguments, rather than static or global variables that might be modified concurrently.
  - **Avoids Modifying Global State:**
    - Any state that needs to be maintained is either passed in as parameters or managed using proper synchronization mechanisms.
  - **Does Not Call Non-Reentrant Functions:**
    - It avoids calling other functions that aren’t reentrant, because that could introduce unsafe behavior.
- Because of these properties, reentrant functions are especially **useful in multi-threaded environments** and in signal handlers, where a function might be interrupted and re-entered.
- For example, the standard library function `strtok()` is not reentrant because it uses static data to maintain state between calls, whereas `strtok_r()` is its reentrant version which requires the caller to supply a context pointer.

## Example

```c
signal_handler(sig){
    my_foo();
    ...
}

my foo(){
    char mybuf[MAX];
    ...
}

do_the_work(){
    my_foo();
    ...
}
```

- The function `my_foo()` is invoked by the business logic func `do_the_work()`. It operates on the local buff `mybuf`.
- While this is still running, a signal is dispatched to this process.
- The signal handler code preempts whatever was executing at the moment it occurred and runs. It reinvokes the func `my_foo()`.
- The process stack is used to hold function call frames, and hence any local variables.
  - Thus, the reentrant function `my_foo()` only uses a local variable.
  - It's been invoked twice. Each invocation will be a separate call frame on the process stack.
- Each invocation of `my_foo()` works on a copy of the local variable `mybuf`, thus it is safe.
  - In the signal-handling context, it's called being `async-signal-safe`. Invoking the function from within a signal handler while a previous invocation is still running is safe.

### What happens if we change the local variable `mybuf` to become a global or static variable.

- As `mybuf` is global, there exists only one copy of it, which will be in an inconsistent state from the first function invocation (by `do_the_work()`). 
- When the second invocation of `my_foo()` occurs, we will work on this inconsistent global `mybuf`, thus corrupting it and clearly this is unsafe.

### General Rule

- Functions that use only local variables are reentrant-safe, any usage of a global or a static data renders them unsafe.