# Code and Data Alignment

- Data alignment deals with what address that a value starts in memory. (Whether that address is a multiple of some number).
- Since we are dealing with an 8-byte (64-bit) word, then it's optimal for memory fetches to be aligned to the nearest multiple of 8.
- Being out of alignment can slow down memory access.
- There are several alignment functions available on the GNU Assembler:
  - `.balign`: aligns the next address to the given multiple.
    - If `.balign 8`, then the next memory address used will be a multiple of 8.
    - By default, the spacing will be zero if we are in a data section or filled with the `nop` instruction if we are in a code section.
    - It’s particularly useful when we need to align to a boundary that is not a power-of‑2 or we prefer to specify the number of bytes directly.
  - `.p2align`: Instead of giving the number of bytes to find a multiple of, we are actually requesting the number of bits used for alignment.
    - When we write `.p2align n`, it aligns to a boundary of 2<sup>n</sup> bytes. 
    - For example, `.p2align 4` will align to 16 bytes (2<sup>4</sup> = 16).
    - It’s explicit and avoids the ambiguities sometimes encountered with `.align`.
  - `.align`: tells the assembler to advance the location counter until it is a multiple of a specified boundary.
    - It is not recommended because for some config, it works like `.p2align` and for others, it works like `.balign`.
    - For example, on some systems (such as many Unix-like systems using GNU assembler on x86), writing `.align 8` may be interpreted as “align to an 8‐byte boundary” or “align to 2<sup>8</sup> (256) bytes”—so caution is needed.
    - It is best to use the specific one that we really want rather than this confusing directive.

---

