# Other Sections and Section Directives

- `.rodata` (Read-Only Data):

  - Holds constant data that should not be modified at runtime. 
  - Examples include string literals, constant arrays, and other fixed values. 
  - Because the data is read-only, the operating system can place this section in a memory region that is protected against writes, which can improve security and potentially allow sharing between processes.

- `.bss`: 

  - Used for uninitialized global and static variables. 
  - Although memory is allocated for these variables, they are not stored in the file as actual data—instead, the OS allocates and initializes this memory to zero when the program starts. 
  - This approach can reduce the size of the executable since uninitialized data doesn't need to be stored explicitly.

- `.lcomm` takes two params 

  - 1st: The name of the symbol for the address
  - 2nd: The amount of space required.

- `.lcomm myvar, 8` reserves a quadword (8-bytes) in the `.bss` section and sets `myvar` to be the address of the start of this memory. 

- Symbols defined using `.lcomm` are local by default. They are not visible outside of the current file unless otherwise marked with `.globl`.

- **`.comm`**:

  - Allocates a common (global) symbol that is externally visible (i.e. it can be referenced across multiple source files).

    ```assembly
    .comm symbol, length, alignment
    ```

  - For example, `.comm myVar, 8, 8` reserves 8 bytes for a global variable `myVar` with 8-byte alignment.

- The GNU Assembler treats all undefined values as **external**, meaning that it is just going to assume that the linker will have another file that defines and exports them with a `.globl` directive.

- `.external` does nothing on the GNU Assembler, but allows us to document which symbols we intend to use from other sources.

---

## Example Code

```assembly
.section .rodata
prompt: .asciz "Hello, world!\n"

.section .bss 
.lcomm buffer, 64 # reserve 64 bytes for a buffer (initialized to 0 at runtime)

.section .text
.globl _start 
_start:
    # write the prompt to stdout
	mov $1, %rdi # stdout 
	mov $prompt, %rsi # address of the string
	mov $14, %rdx # length of the string
	mov $1, %rax # syscall number for write
	syscall 

	# exit the program 
	mov $60, %rax 
	syscall 
```

```bash
chan@CMA:~/C_Programming/Assembly$ as practice.s -o practice.o
practice.s: Assembler messages:
practice.s:18: Warning: end of file not at end of a line; newline inserted
chan@CMA:~/C_Programming/Assembly$ ld practice.o -o practice
chan@CMA:~/C_Programming/Assembly$ ./practice
Hello, world!
```

