# Arming and disarming a POSIX timer

- `timer_settime(2)` system call to either arm (start) or disarm (stop) a timer:
- When armed, the timer will count down and notify the application upon expiration. 
- Disarming a timer is accomplished by calling `timer_settime()` with an expiration value of zero, effectively stopping the countdown and preventing any notification from being sent.

```c
#include <time.h>
int timer_settime(timer_t timerid, int flags, const struct itimerspec *new_value, struct itimerspec *old_value);
```

- As we can have multiple concurrent POSIX timers running simultaneously, thus we need to specify which timer we are referring to via the **1st param (`timerid`)**. (Effective return of `timer_create()`).
- **`flags`:** Specifies how the expiration time is interpreted. 
  - A common flag is `TIMER_ABSTIME`, which tells the timer to interpret `new_value.it_value` as an absolute time; otherwise, the time is taken as relative.
- **`new_value`:**A pointer to a struct `itimerspec` that defines:
  - **it_value:** The initial amount of time until the timer expires. **Setting this to a nonzero value arms the timer, whereas zero disarms it**.
  - **it_interval:** The interval for periodic expirations. If nonzero, after the timer expires, it will automatically be reset to this interval.
- **`old_value`:** An optional pointer to a struct `itimerspec` where the previous timer settings are stored. This parameter can be useful if we need to know the timer's state before modification.
  - If 0, it is simply ignored.
  - If non-zero, it is a means to query the time remaining to the expirary of the given timer.
  - The time to expirary will be returned in the `old_value->it_value` member (in seconds and nanoseconds), and the interval it was set will be returned in the `old_value->it_interval` member.

**`itimerspec`**

```c
struct timespec {
	time_t tv_sec; /* Seconds */
	long tv_nsec; /* Nanoseconds */
};
struct itimerspec {
	struct timespec it_interval; /* Timer interval */
	struct timespec it_value; /* Initial expiration */
};
```

---

