# Timers via file descriptors

- A Linux-specific mechanism that allow us to monitor timer events using file descriptor I/O, rather than signals. 
- Especially useful when integrating timers into an event-driven architecture using `select(2)`, `poll(2)`, or `epoll(7)`.

### How It Works

```c
#include <sys/timerfd.h>
int timerfd_create(int clockid, int flags);
int timerfd_settime(int fd, int flags, const struct itimerspec *new_value, struct itimerspec *old_value);
int timerfd_gettime(int fd, struct itimerspec *curr_value);
```

- **`timerfd_create()`:**
  - Creates a file descriptor associated with a timer. 
  - We specify the clock (e.g., `CLOCK_REALTIME `or `CLOCK_MONOTONIC`) and optional flags (like `TFD_NONBLOCK` or `TFD_CLOEXEC`). 
  - The returned file descriptor can then be monitored for timer expirations.
- **`timerfd_settime()`:**
  - Once we have the timer file descriptor, we arm the timer by calling `timerfd_settime()`. 
  - This function lets us specify both the initial expiration time and an optional interval for periodic expirations. 
  - If the timer is armed, the file descriptor becomes readable when the timer expires.
- **`timerfd_gettime()`:**
  - This function is used to query the current timer settings (the remaining time until the next expiration and the interval).

### Reading from the File Descriptor

- When the timer expires, the file descriptor becomes readable. 
- A call to `read()` on this file descriptor returns an unsigned 8-byte integer (typically of type `uint64_t`) representing the number of timer expirations that have occurred since the last read. 
- This design allows our application to detect if timer expirations were missed (i.e., if more than one expiration occurred before you read from the descriptor).

### Benefits

- **Integration with Event Loops:**

  - Timer file descriptors can be easily integrated into an application's main event loop alongside other file descriptors (e.g., sockets or pipes). 

  - This unified approach simplifies asynchronous I/O management.

- **Avoiding Signal Handling Complexity:**

  - Since no signals are involved, weavoid the complexities and potential pitfalls of signal handling, such as reentrancy issues and the need for minimal processing in signal handlers.

- Upon a `fork(2)`, the child process will inherit a copy of the file descriptor pertaining to any timer created in the parent via the `timerfd_create(2)` API. Effectively, it shares the same timer as the parent.

- Upon an `execve(2)`, the timer remain valid in the successor process and will continue expiring upon timeout unless upon creation, the `TFD_CLOEXEC` flag was specified.

---

